

Tan2012 - Antibiotic Treatment, Inoculum Effect

The efficacy of many antibiotics decreases with increasing bacterial density,
a phenomenon called the ‘inoculum effect’ (IE). This study reveals that, for
ribosome-targeting antibiotics, IE is due to bistable inhibition of bacterial
growth, which reduces the efficacy of certain treatment frequencies.

This model is described in the article:

[The inoculum effect and band-pass bacterial response to periodic antibiotic
treatment.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/23047527)

Tan C, Phillip Smith R, Srimani JK, Riccione KA, Prasada S, Kuehn M, You L.

Mol Syst Biol. 2012 Oct 9; 8:617

Abstract:

The inoculum effect (IE) refers to the decreasing efficacy of an antibiotic
with increasing bacterial density. It represents a unique strategy of
antibiotic tolerance and it can complicate design of effective antibiotic
treatment of bacterial infections. To gain insight into this phenomenon, we
have analyzed responses of a lab strain of Escherichia coli to antibiotics
that target the ribosome. We show that the IE can be explained by bistable
inhibition of bacterial growth. A critical requirement for this bistability is
sufficiently fast degradation of ribosomes, which can result from antibiotic-
induced heat-shock response. Furthermore, antibiotics that elicit the IE can
lead to 'band-pass' response of bacterial growth to periodic antibiotic
treatment: the treatment efficacy drastically diminishes at intermediate
frequencies of treatment. Our proposed mechanism for the IE may be generally
applicable to other bacterial species treated with antibiotics targeting the
ribosomes.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[MODEL1208300000](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/MODEL1208300000) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

